---
title: Elixir for .NET Developers Part 1: Assignment
date: 2022-03-24 10:40:00 +0
categories: [Programming]
tags: [elixir, dotnet]
---

Throughout this series, I want to introduce the core concepts of Elixir and
OTP using C# (with a couple of forays into F#) and .NET as comparison points.

I hope to stress just how wonderful Elixir is and how as a frustrated C# Developer
it has provided a much needed *tonic* (sorry) that has made me fall in love with programming
again.

Elixir is a functional, dynamic and extensible language that leverages the OTP
(Open Telecom Platform) runtime originally utilised by the Erlang language.

I'm fond of saying there is at least a surface level resemblance to Ruby, but it
has much more in common with a LISP past superficial syntactic similarities.

Now, there is not much natural crossover between Elixir and C#, even something
as seemingly simple as assignment functions quite differently between the two.

## Assignment and matching

Given the following blocks of code, it is pretty easy to make the assumption that
they are equivalent. We are assigning a variable, named `test`, to the value of `1`.

```cs
var test = 1;
```
{: .nolineno }

```elixir
test = 1
```
{: .nolineno }

This is pretty much programming 101, the very foundation of most mainstream
languages regardless of the paradigm they use - whether object oriented,
functional or imperative.

Certain languages, such as Go, may change the operator slightly but we can all
agree that this is immediately recognisable as assignment.

```go
test := 1
```
{: .nolineno }

`test`, regardless of language, is `1`.

This is of course the same as in Elixir. However, there is much more going on
here than simple assignment.

Take the following:

```elixir
1 = 1
"test" = "test"
[1, 2, 3] = [1, 2, 3]
```
{: .nolineno }

**This is valid Elixir code.**

But each of the left hand operands are discrete, static values! How can this
possibly work? You can't *assign* the value `1` to `1` or an array to another array!

What happens if we run the following Elixir code?

```elixir
2 = 1
```
{: .nolineno }

> ** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: 1
{: .prompt-danger }

`2` is (obviously!) not `1`.

What is going on here?

### Assignment via pattern matching

In Elixir, what we take as the *assignment* operator is in fact the *match*
operator.

Assignment happens via *pattern matching* and **only** if one or more identifiers
are present on the left hand operand.

I hesitate to use the term *side effect* as that is overloaded and typically used
to describe non-functional idioms, but it is maybe easier to think of it as such.

This allows us to write things such as:

```elixir
[value, 2, 3] = [1, 2, 3]
```
{: .nolineno }

Or even:

```elixir
value1 = 1
[value2, 2, 3] = [value1, 2, 3]
```
{: .nolineno }

